TODO: take pictures of my commute and post them

(ooo scary I know)

Every weekday morning, I wake up, make myself oatmeal, and bike to school. It's
one of my most enjoyable quotidian routines. In this post, I'll try to explain
why biking has been a highlight of my semester, and I'll also try to convince
you that it's worth living close enough to work or school that you can bike.

I live about 20 minutes from campus. Conveniently, a network of low-traffic
residential roads and paved trails extends almost the whole way there. As luck
would have it, this route also consists only of gradual uphill or downhill
stretches with the exception of one short climb that allows me to feel like I'm
actually getting real exercise. Though sometimes patches of ice lie in my way,
it's nothing my mountain bike can't handle, as long as I'm not reckless. Often
I wave to the broad demographic of other Golden residents who share my
enjoyment of exercising outdoors. If I'm paying attention, sometimes I'll see
birds flitting among the bushes, looking for a patch of morning sunlight.

The cool January air invigorates my mind on the way to school and clears it on
the way back. I'm sure you've heard at some point that exercise is good for
mental health. I haven't formally researched this, but anecdotally, it seems to
be true. Besides, there's other health benefits from being outside. When I'm
inside, or even in a car, I watch what happens around me. I'm surrounded by
circumstances and must be content to observe them. But when my legs are
churning in the highest gear, sending me flying over the bumps in the concrete,
the wind rushing against my face and finding its way underneath my jacket,
that's when I can be *part* of the world rather than watching it. Simply put,
humans are meant to experience the world, and biking is a great way to
habitualize that.

The merits of biking, however, are not confined to the soul. I save $25/month
on gas money alone, not counting trips to places besides school. I save 40
minutes a day by parallelizing cardio and commuting. (And besides, it's not
like I would be disciplined enough to go to the gym daily if I didn't bike.) I
reduce my greenhouse gas emissions.

The few problems a bike commute does impose are easily handled. The danger is
mitigated by living in a place where I can mostly take residential roads and
trails, by choosing to use the sidewalk for the brief unavoidable stretch of
major road, and by making a habit of wearing my helmet. The cold is overcome by
purchasing high-quality winter gloves and packing a pair of sweats in my
backpack. The extra 10 minutes versus a car commute are a small inconvenience
with sufficient time management, and parking is so much easier that I probably
get most of that time back.

So what happens when you switch from a car commute to a bike commute? You'll be
happier and more in shape. When lunchtime rolls around, you'll find yourself
hungrier than usual, in the most delightful way. You won't have to refuel your
car or change your oil as often. In short, you will reap large mental,
physical, and financial benefits by making small compromises. If you're
able-bodied enough to ride a bike, and fortunate enough to have the resources
to live close to your daily commute, I'd highly recommend it over a car. 
