I haven't thought about my SAT score for ages. In fact, I've forgotten what it
was. I also couldn't tell you how many AP classes I took, or how many 5s I
earned from them.

In 11th or 12th grade—I can't remember which—I found myself sitting in an
unfamiliar high school with truly impressive cascades of mucus emanating from
my nostrils. This circumstance was especially awkward because I was in a room
full of other students taking the SAT. I'd already taken it, but I was trying
again because "my old score wasn't good enough." Unsure how to discreetly
extract the snot with an already-soaked tissue, I attempted to use the tissue
as a glove while pinching the albumen-like liquid and pulling away from my
face. This was comically ineffective. A proctor noticed and offered me a box of
tissues.

Gross, right? But not nearly as disgusting as the inane grindset imposed on
high school students by corporate entities like the College Board and
reinforced by society's obsessive veneration for the top 1% of postsecondary
education institutions. My high school years were dominated by the idea of
getting into a "good college". Anything less than an A was a calamity. Some
extracurriculars were taken up for enjoyment; others were chosen to lengthen
the list in my Common App account. Like-minded people on Reddit jokingly
offered to exchange their firstborn children for 5s on their AP exams. *Our
main focus should be acceptance into an elite university,* we thought. *After
that, our path to wealth and happiness will be secured.*

A person's wealth and success stem from their attitude, the ideals they pursue,
and unfortunately, other circumstances outside their control. However, those
are mostly independent of which university they attend. Life is not measured by
test scores, grades, or some other numerical proxy for worthiness, but rather
guided by intangibles like discovering what brings you fulfillment, making
friends, practicing skills you'll need for your career, and enjoying
opportunities that won't come again. You go to high school to develop those
intangibles. When you let college worries overshadow them, you oversimplify
what high school is supposed to prepare you for.

Although you don't have to know what you want to do with your life, you should
know why you're going to college. Why would you spend so much money if you
can't explain why you want to go? Most people, once they understand their
motivations clearly enough to articulate them, will find that a lesser-known
local school can meet their needs just as well as a prestigious one. Both
enable you to enter a field that requires a degree, to discover the joy of
spending four years with other people your age, or simply to act on your belief
that education is intrinsically valuable. The most important lessons learned in
college are not taught in classrooms.

Moreover, acceptance into an elite university does not guarantee wealth or
happiness. Rather, elite universities seem to be conducive to success because
they only accept the students who would be successful anywhere. Although I
certainly wouldn't discourage anyone from dreaming of getting into Stanford, I
would discourage the idea of designing their high school career around that
objective.

There's also the issue of luck. Some factors of getting accepted to a
university are out of your control. After all, virtually all top-tier
universities see more qualified applicants than they have room for. Wise people
design their life so that they don't have to be lucky to stay out of trouble.
That's why they save for emergency funds and wear seat belts. You, too, can
diminish the need for luck in your college career by admitting you can be happy
and accomplished at schools that aren't your first choice.

This doesn't mean things like grades or the SAT are unimportant. I'm only
stressing that they instantly lose their importance the moment you submit your
enrollment deposit. In contrast, other high school pursuits cultivate personal
growth, an asset whose importance never fades.

So, if any overachieving high school seniors have happened upon this little
essay, I ask you to use your last year well. You'll never get to be a high
school student again. You'll never get to be a non-adult again. Don't burden
yourself with relatively short-term concerns. Go do stuff. Make the most of it.
