I've only been an adult for a couple years, and I've already learned a lot.
There's a lot more learning left for me to do, but my hope is that by
publishing this I can help myself internalize what I write, and if I'm lucky,
I'll help someone else, too. In this post, I want to list a few things I've
learned in high school and college which are widely applicable to college
students.

**Go out and do stuff with people.** College is an ideal setting for this.
Travel places, join clubs, and share dinners. Ask your friends if they want to
go on a hike this weekend. You'd be surprised how many of them were willing to
get together but waiting for someone else to initiate.

**Take meals, chores, and other responsibilities seriously.** It's tempting to
skip breakfast to buy yourself an extra hour of sleeping in, to allow the
floors to go unswept, to stay up so that bedtime doesn't cut leisure time
short. Stop treating these like valid options. You're an adult. You have to eat
breakfast. You have to clean the floor. You have to go to bed. These tasks
constitute critical maintenance for various aspects of your health. Anyone who
is unhealthy, by choice or by misfortune, can tell you that health is a gift.
Don't allow lack of self-control to squander it.

**Getting behind in classes is an emergency.** It's not something you "work on"
when you feel like it. If an assignment is past due, you need to treat it
urgently, to cancel everything except eating, sleeping, and classes until you
get it done. If this doesn't sound like fun, that's because it isn't. That's
why you shouldn't let yourself get in this situation! As you get more and more
behind, it becomes exponentially harder to catch up.

**Write thank-you letters.** Writing is a powerful form of communication, and
receiving gifts is a great excuse to use it. Once you've bought envelopes and
stamps, it only takes 20 or 30 minutes of effort—or less, if you write faster
than I—to communicate to people how much you value them. This will likely give
you great satisfaction, as valuing other people is pretty much the main point
of existence.

**Address problems before they become big problems.** If you don't do anything
or say anything, things won't get better. Issues are much easier to resolve
when they're not pervasively incapacitating. Whether your roommate isn't doing
their dishes, your coworker has an annoying habit, or a professor's lecture
style isn't effective for you, passive endurance is sure to be an ineffective
counter. You have to do something about it.

All of these have a central theme: **reject passivity.** Doing nothing is
naturally a default state, but everything in life that has value comes from
taking action (or from other people taking action). Under an ideology of
inaction, you are a victim of circumstances outside your control. Under an
ideology of action, there are still some things you can't change, but you are
tasked with the responsibility to shift or handle the circumstances as best as
you are able.

These aren't my only realizations, but they're a good place to start. I still
have a long way to go, but I'm grateful for the opportunity to go to college,
without which I probably would not have gathered many of these ideas. I hope
some of them were helpful! 
