When was the last time you were bored?

For many of my readers, it may take a while to name the exact moment because we
design our lives to minimize down time. It's annoying to be bored, so we avoid
the feeling, most of us by filling every 30-second pause with a quick
smartphone check. In the kitchen, waiting for water to boil, in the office,
waiting for Microsoft Outlook to load, or in bed, waiting to fall asleep, we
are granted precious moments where there is nothing to do. Far too often I find
myself reaching for my phone or opening a new tab in these situations, feeling
the need to maintain my current level of stimulation, to suppress the
irritating void. But over the months, I've found myself using a different
adjective to describe the sensation: *useful*.

Humans get bored for a reason. Boredom is the natural instinct to pursue the
things that deserve our attention. It helps us start projects, seek new
experiences, and extend our existing knowledge. It gives us time to process and
digest worries that would overwhelm us if we went too long without considering
them. It finds foggy plans for tasks we need to accomplish and bubbles them to
the surface of consciousness.

It's a good thing that boredom is annoying because restlessness creates an
impetus to act. And when you remove the possibility of using that call to
action to unlock a phone, put on music, or otherwise regain a stimulus,
suddenly the only things left to do are the useful ones, like taking out the
trash, scrubbing the inside of the microwave, wondering how long it's been
since you got together with your parents, or considering whether it's necessary
to stop by the grocery store on the way home tonight.

So, next time you get bored, don't waste the magic motivation medicine. Boredom
is a tool. Use it.
